READLINE(3)                                         READLINE(3)





NAME
       readline - get a line from a user with editing

SYNOPSIS
       #include <stdio.h>
       #include <readline/readline.h>
       #include <readline/history.h>

       char *
       readline (const char *prompt);

COPYRIGHT
       Readline is Copyright (C) 1989-2004 by the Free Software
       Foundation, Inc.

DESCRIPTION
       readline will read a line from the terminal  and  return
       it,  using prompt as a prompt.  If prompt is NULL or the
       empty string, no prompt is issued.  The line returned is
       allocated  with  malloc(3); the caller must free it when
       finished.  The  line  returned  has  the  final  newline
       removed, so only the text of the line remains.

       readline  offers  editing capabilities while the user is
       entering the line.  By default, the  line  editing  com-
       mands  are  similar  to those of emacs.  A vi-style line
       editing interface is also available.

       This manual page describes only the most  basic  use  of
       readline.  Much more functionality is available; see The
       GNU Readline Library and The  GNU  History  Library  for
       additional information.

RETURN VALUE
       readline  returns  the  text  of the line read.  A blank
       line returns the empty string.  If  EOF  is  encountered
       while  reading  a  line,  and the line is empty, NULL is
       returned.  If an EOF is read with a non-empty  line,  it
       is treated as a newline.

NOTATION
       An  emacs-style  notation  is used to denote keystrokes.
       Control keys are denoted by C-key, e.g., C-n means  Con-
       trol-N.   Similarly,  meta keys are denoted by M-key, so
       M-x means Meta-X.  (On keyboards without a meta key, M-x
       means  ESC x, i.e., press the Escape key then the x key.
       This makes ESC the meta prefix.  The  combination  M-C-x
       means  ESC-Control-x,  or press the Escape key then hold
       the Control key while pressing the x key.)

       Readline commands may be given numeric arguments,  which
       normally  act as a repeat count.  Sometimes, however, it
       is the sign of the argument that is significant.   Pass-
       ing  a  negative  argument to a command that acts in the
       forward direction (e.g., kill-line) causes that  command
       to act in a backward direction.  Commands whose behavior
       with arguments deviates from this are noted.

       When a command is described as killing  text,  the  text
       deleted  is  saved  for possible future retrieval (yank-
       ing).  The killed text is saved in a kill ring.  Consec-
       utive  kills  cause  the text to be accumulated into one
       unit, which can be yanked all at once.   Commands  which
       do not kill text separate the chunks of text on the kill
       ring.

INITIALIZATION FILE
       Readline is customized by putting commands  in  an  ini-
       tialization  file  (the inputrc file).  The name of this
       file is taken from the value of the INPUTRC  environment
       variable.   If  that  variable  is unset, the default is
       ~/.inputrc.  When a  program  which  uses  the  readline
       library  starts  up,  the init file is read, and the key
       bindings and variables are set.  There are  only  a  few
       basic  constructs  allowed  in  the  readline init file.
       Blank lines are ignored.  Lines beginning with a  #  are
       comments.  Lines beginning with a $ indicate conditional
       constructs.  Other lines denote key bindings  and  vari-
       able  settings.  Each program using this library may add
       its own commands and bindings.

       For example, placing

              M-Control-u: universal-argument
       or
              C-Meta-u: universal-argument

       into the inputrc would make M-C-u execute  the  readline
       command universal-argument.

       The  following  symbolic  character names are recognized
       while processing key bindings: DEL,  ESC,  ESCAPE,  LFD,
       NEWLINE, RET, RETURN, RUBOUT, SPACE, SPC, and TAB.

       In addition to command names, readline allows keys to be
       bound to a string that  is  inserted  when  the  key  is
       pressed (a macro).


   Key Bindings
       The  syntax  for controlling key bindings in the inputrc
       file is simple.  All that is required is the name of the
       command  or  the  text  of a macro and a key sequence to
       which it should be bound. The name may be  specified  in
       one  of  two ways: as a symbolic key name, possibly with
       Meta- or Control- prefixes, or as a key sequence.

       When using the form keyname:function-name or macro, key-
       name  is  the name of a key spelled out in English.  For
       example:

              Control-u: universal-argument
              Meta-Rubout: backward-kill-word
              Control-o: "> output"

       In the above example, C-u is bound to the function  uni-
       versal-argument,  M-DEL  is  bound to the function back-
       ward-kill-word, and  C-o  is  bound  to  run  the  macro
       expressed on the right hand side (that is, to insert the
       text ``> output'' into the line).

       In the second  form,  "keyseq":function-name  or  macro,
       keyseq differs from keyname above in that strings denot-
       ing an entire key sequence may be specified  by  placing
       the sequence within double quotes.  Some GNU Emacs style
       key escapes can be used, as in  the  following  example,
       but the symbolic character names are not recognized.

              "\C-u": universal-argument
              "\C-x\C-r": re-read-init-file
              "\e[11~": "Function Key 1"

       In this example, C-u is again bound to the function uni-
       versal-argument.  C-x  C-r  is  bound  to  the  function
       re-read-init-file,  and  ESC  [ 1 1 ~ is bound to insert
       the text ``Function Key 1''.

       The full set of GNU Emacs style escape sequences  avail-
       able when specifying key sequences is
              \C-    control prefix
              \M-    meta prefix
              \e     an escape character
              \\     backslash
              \"     literal ", a double quote
              \'     literal ', a single quote

       In  addition  to the GNU Emacs style escape sequences, a
       second set of backslash escapes is available:
              \a     alert (bell)
              \b     backspace
              \d     delete
              \f     form feed
              \n     newline
              \r     carriage return
              \t     horizontal tab
              \v     vertical tab
              \nnn   the eight-bit character whose value is the
                     octal value nnn (one to three digits)
              \xHH   the eight-bit character whose value is the
                     hexadecimal value HH (one or two hex  dig-
                     its)

       When  entering  the  text  of  a macro, single or double
       quotes should be used to indicate  a  macro  definition.
       Unquoted  text is assumed to be a function name.  In the
       macro body, the backslash escapes  described  above  are
       expanded.   Backslash  will quote any other character in
       the macro text, including " and '.

       Bash allows the current readline key bindings to be dis-
       played  or  modified with the bind builtin command.  The
       editing mode may be switched during interactive  use  by
       using  the  -o option to the set builtin command.  Other
       programs using this library provide similar  mechanisms.
       The  inputrc file may be edited and re-read if a program
       does not provide any  other  means  to  incorporate  new
       bindings.

   Variables
       Readline  has variables that can be used to further cus-
       tomize its behavior.  A variable may be set in the inpu-
       trc file with a statement of the form

              set variable-name value

       Except where noted, readline variables can take the val-
       ues On or Off (without regard to case).   The  variables
       and their default values are:

       bell-style (audible)
              Controls what happens when readline wants to ring
              the terminal bell.   If  set  to  none,  readline
              never  rings  the bell.  If set to visible, read-
              line uses a visible bell if one is available.  If
              set  to  audible,  readline  attempts to ring the
              terminal's bell.
       comment-begin (``#'')
              The string that is inserted in vi mode  when  the
              insert-comment command is executed.  This command
              is bound to M-# in emacs mode and to # in vi com-
              mand mode.
       completion-ignore-case (Off)
              If set to On, readline performs filename matching
              and completion in a case-insensitive fashion.
       completion-query-items (100)
              This determines when the user  is  queried  about
              viewing the number of possible completions gener-
              ated by the possible-completions command.  It may
              be set to any integer value greater than or equal
              to zero.  If the number of  possible  completions
              is  greater  than  or  equal to the value of this
              variable, the user is asked  whether  or  not  he
              wishes  to  view  them; otherwise they are simply
              listed on the terminal.
       convert-meta (On)
              If set to On, readline  will  convert  characters
              with  the eighth bit set to an ASCII key sequence
              by stripping the eighth bit and prefixing it with
              an  escape  character (in effect, using escape as
              the meta prefix).
       disable-completion (Off)
              If set to On, readline will inhibit word  comple-
              tion.   Completion  characters  will  be inserted
              into the line as if they had been mapped to self-
              insert.
       editing-mode (emacs)
              Controls  whether  readline  begins with a set of
              key bindings  similar  to  emacs  or  vi.   edit-
              ing-mode can be set to either emacs or vi.
       enable-keypad (Off)
              When  set  to On, readline will try to enable the
              application keypad when it is called.  Some  sys-
              tems need this to enable the arrow keys.
       expand-tilde (Off)
              If  set  to on, tilde expansion is performed when
              readline attempts word completion.
       history-preserve-point
              If set to on, the history code attempts to  place
              point  at  the same location on each history line
              retrived with previous-history or next-history.
       horizontal-scroll-mode (Off)
              When set to On, makes readline use a single  line
              for  display, scrolling the input horizontally on
              a single screen line when it becomes longer  than
              the  screen  width  rather than wrapping to a new
              line.
       input-meta (Off)
              If set to  On,  readline  will  enable  eight-bit
              input  (that is, it will not clear the eighth bit
              in the characters it reads), regardless  of  what
              the  terminal  claims  it  can support.  The name
              meta-flag is a synonym for this variable.
       isearch-terminators (``C-[ C-J'')
              The string of characters that should terminate an
              incremental search without subsequently executing
              the character as a command.  If this variable has
              not  been  given  a value, the characters ESC and
              C-J will terminate an incremental search.
       keymap (emacs)
              Set the current  readline  keymap.   The  set  of
              legal  keymap  names  is  emacs,  emacs-standard,
              emacs-meta, emacs-ctlx, vi, vi-move,  vi-command,
              and  vi-insert.   vi is equivalent to vi-command;
              emacs  is  equivalent  to  emacs-standard.    The
              default  value  is  emacs.   The  value  of edit-
              ing-mode also affects the default keymap.
       mark-directories (On)
              If set to On, completed directory  names  have  a
              slash appended.
       mark-modified-lines (Off)
              If  set to On, history lines that have been modi-
              fied are displayed with a preceding asterisk (*).
       mark-symlinked-directories (Off)
              If  set to On, completed names which are symbolic
              links to directories have a slash appended  (sub-
              ject to the value of mark-directories).
       match-hidden-files (On)
              This variable, when set to On, causes readline to
              match files whose names begin with a `.'  (hidden
              files)   when   performing  filename  completion,
              unless the leading `.' is supplied by the user in
              the filename to be completed.
       output-meta (Off)
              If  set  to  On, readline will display characters
              with the eighth bit set directly rather than as a
              meta-prefixed escape sequence.
       page-completions (On)
              If set to On, readline uses an internal more-like
              pager to display a screenful of possible  comple-
              tions at a time.
       print-completions-horizontally (Off)
              If  set  to On, readline will display completions
              with matches sorted horizontally in  alphabetical
              order, rather than down the screen.
       show-all-if-ambiguous (Off)
              This  alters  the default behavior of the comple-
              tion functions.  If set to on, words  which  have
              more  than  one  possible  completion  cause  the
              matches to be listed immediately instead of ring-
              ing the bell.
       show-all-if-unmodified (Off)
              This  alters  the default behavior of the comple-
              tion  functions   in   a   fashion   similar   to
              show-all-if-ambiguous.  If set to on, words which
              have more than one  possible  completion  without
              any  possible  partial  completion  (the possible
              completions don't share a  common  prefix)  cause
              the  matches  to be listed immediately instead of
              ringing the bell.
       visible-stats (Off)
              If set to On, a character denoting a file's  type
              as  reported  by stat(2) is appended to the file-
              name when listing possible completions.

   Conditional Constructs
       Readline implements a facility similar in spirit to  the
       conditional  compilation  features of the C preprocessor
       which allows key bindings and variable  settings  to  be
       performed as the result of tests.  There are four parser
       directives used.

       $if    The $if construct  allows  bindings  to  be  made
              based  on  the  editing  mode, the terminal being
              used, or the  application  using  readline.   The
              text  of the test extends to the end of the line;
              no characters are required to isolate it.

              mode   The mode= form of  the  $if  directive  is
                     used  to test whether readline is in emacs
                     or vi mode.  This may be used in  conjunc-
                     tion  with  the  set  keymap  command, for
                     instance, to set bindings  in  the  emacs-
                     standard  and  emacs-ctlx  keymaps only if
                     readline is starting out in emacs mode.

              term   The term= form may be used to include ter-
                     minal-specific  key  bindings,  perhaps to
                     bind the key sequences output by the  ter-
                     minal's  function  keys.   The word on the
                     right side of the = is tested against  the
                     full  name of the terminal and the portion
                     of the terminal name before the  first  -.
                     This  allows  sun  to  match  both sun and
                     sun-cmd, for instance.

              application
                     The  application  construct  is  used   to
                     include   application-specific   settings.
                     Each program using  the  readline  library
                     sets the application name, and an initial-
                     ization file can  test  for  a  particular
                     value.   This  could  be  used to bind key
                     sequences to functions useful for  a  spe-
                     cific  program.  For instance, the follow-
                     ing  command  adds  a  key  sequence  that
                     quotes  the  current  or  previous word in
                     Bash:

                     $if Bash
                     # Quote the current or previous word
                     "\C-xq": "\eb\"\ef\""
                     $endif

       $endif This command, as seen in  the  previous  example,
              terminates an $if command.

       $else  Commands  in this branch of the $if directive are
              executed if the test fails.

       $include
              This directive takes  a  single  filename  as  an
              argument  and  reads  commands  and bindings from
              that file.  For example, the following  directive
              would read /etc/inputrc:

              $include  /etc/inputrc

SEARCHING
       Readline  provides  commands  for  searching through the
       command history for lines containing a specified string.
       There  are  two search modes: incremental and non-incre-
       mental.

       Incremental searches begin before the user has  finished
       typing  the  search  string.   As  each character of the
       search string is typed, readline displays the next entry
       from  the  history matching the string typed so far.  An
       incremental search requires only as many  characters  as
       needed  to  find  the  desired history entry.  To search
       backward in the history for a  particular  string,  type
       C-r.   Typing  C-s searches forward through the history.
       The characters present in the value of the  isearch-ter-
       minators  variable  are used to terminate an incremental
       search.  If that variable has not been assigned a  value
       the  Escape  and C-J characters will terminate an incre-
       mental search.  C-G will abort an incremental search and
       restore  the  original  line.  When the search is termi-
       nated, the history entry containing  the  search  string
       becomes the current line.

       To find other matching entries in the history list, type
       C-s or C-r as appropriate.  This will search backward or
       forward  in  the  history for the next line matching the
       search string typed so  far.   Any  other  key  sequence
       bound  to  a  readline command will terminate the search
       and execute that command.  For instance, a newline  will
       terminate  the  search and accept the line, thereby exe-
       cuting the command from the history  list.   A  movement
       command  will  terminate  the search, make the last line
       found the current line, and begin editing.

       Non-incremental searches read the entire  search  string
       before  starting  to  search for matching history lines.
       The search string may be typed by the user or be part of
       the contents of the current line.

EDITING COMMANDS
       The following is a list of the names of the commands and
       the default key sequences to which they are bound.  Com-
       mand  names  without  an  accompanying  key sequence are
       unbound by default.

       In the following descriptions, point refers to the  cur-
       rent  cursor position, and mark refers to a cursor posi-
       tion saved by the set-mark command.   The  text  between
       the point and mark is referred to as the region.

   Commands for Moving
       beginning-of-line (C-a)
              Move to the start of the current line.
       end-of-line (C-e)
              Move to the end of the line.
       forward-char (C-f)
              Move forward a character.
       backward-char (C-b)
              Move back a character.
       forward-word (M-f)
              Move  forward to the end of the next word.  Words
              are composed of alphanumeric characters  (letters
              and digits).
       backward-word (M-b)
              Move back to the start of the current or previous
              word.  Words are composed of alphanumeric charac-
              ters (letters and digits).
       clear-screen (C-l)
              Clear  the screen leaving the current line at the
              top of the screen.  With an argument, refresh the
              current line without clearing the screen.
       redraw-current-line
              Refresh the current line.

   Commands for Manipulating the History
       accept-line (Newline, Return)
              Accept  the  line  regardless of where the cursor
              is.  If this line is non-empty, it may  be  added
              to  the  history  list  for  future  recall  with
              add_history().  If the line is a modified history
              line,  the history line is restored to its origi-
              nal state.
       previous-history (C-p)
              Fetch the previous command from the history list,
              moving back in the list.
       next-history (C-n)
              Fetch  the  next  command  from the history list,
              moving forward in the list.
       beginning-of-history (M-<)
              Move to the first line in the history.
       end-of-history (M->)
              Move to the end of the input history,  i.e.,  the
              line currently being entered.
       reverse-search-history (C-r)
              Search  backward starting at the current line and
              moving `up' through  the  history  as  necessary.
              This is an incremental search.
       forward-search-history (C-s)
              Search  forward  starting at the current line and
              moving `down' through the history  as  necessary.
              This is an incremental search.
       non-incremental-reverse-search-history (M-p)
              Search  backward  through the history starting at
              the current line using a  non-incremental  search
              for a string supplied by the user.
       non-incremental-forward-search-history (M-n)
              Search  forward  through the history using a non-
              incremental search for a string supplied  by  the
              user.
       history-search-forward
              Search forward through the history for the string
              of characters between the start  of  the  current
              line and the current cursor position (the point).
              This is a non-incremental search.
       history-search-backward
              Search  backward  through  the  history  for  the
              string  of  characters  between  the start of the
              current line and the point.  This is a non-incre-
              mental search.
       yank-nth-arg (M-C-y)
              Insert the first argument to the previous command
              (usually the second word on the previous line) at
              point.   With  an argument n, insert the nth word
              from the previous command (the words in the  pre-
              vious  command  begin  with  word 0).  A negative
              argument inserts the nth word from the end of the
              previous command.
       yank-last-arg (M-., M-_)
              Insert  the last argument to the previous command
              (the last word of the  previous  history  entry).
              With    an    argument,   behave   exactly   like
              yank-nth-arg.  Successive calls to  yank-last-arg
              move back through the history list, inserting the
              last argument of each line in turn.

   Commands for Changing Text
       delete-char (C-d)
              Delete the character at point.  If  point  is  at
              the  beginning  of the line, there are no charac-
              ters in the line, and the  last  character  typed
              was not bound to delete-char, then return EOF.
       backward-delete-char (Rubout)
              Delete  the  character  behind  the cursor.  When
              given a numeric argument, save the  deleted  text
              on the kill ring.
       forward-backward-delete-char
              Delete the character under the cursor, unless the
              cursor is at the end of the line, in  which  case
              the character behind the cursor is deleted.
       quoted-insert (C-q, C-v)
              Add  the next character that you type to the line
              verbatim.  This is how to insert characters  like
              C-q, for example.
       tab-insert (M-TAB)
              Insert a tab character.
       self-insert (a, b, A, 1, !, ...)
              Insert the character typed.
       transpose-chars (C-t)
              Drag  the character before point forward over the
              character at point, moving point forward as well.
              If  point  is  at  the end of the line, then this
              transposes the two characters before point.  Neg-
              ative arguments have no effect.
       transpose-words (M-t)
              Drag  the  word  before point past the word after
              point, moving point over that word as  well.   If
              point  is at the end of the line, this transposes
              the last two words on the line.
       upcase-word (M-u)
              Uppercase the current (or following) word.   With
              a negative argument, uppercase the previous word,
              but do not move point.
       downcase-word (M-l)
              Lowercase the current (or following) word.   With
              a negative argument, lowercase the previous word,
              but do not move point.
       capitalize-word (M-c)
              Capitalize the current (or following) word.  With
              a  negative  argument,  capitalize  the  previous
              word, but do not move point.
       overwrite-mode
              Toggle overwrite mode.  With an explicit positive
              numeric  argument,  switches  to  overwrite mode.
              With an explicit non-positive  numeric  argument,
              switches  to  insert  mode.  This command affects
              only emacs mode; vi mode does  overwrite  differ-
              ently.   Each call to readline() starts in insert
              mode.  In overwrite  mode,  characters  bound  to
              self-insert replace the text at point rather than
              pushing the text to the right.  Characters  bound
              to  backward-delete-char  replace  the  character
              before point with a space.  By default, this com-
              mand is unbound.

   Killing and Yanking
       kill-line (C-k)
              Kill  the text from point to the end of the line.
       backward-kill-line (C-x Rubout)
              Kill backward to the beginning of the line.
       unix-line-discard (C-u)
              Kill backward from point to the beginning of  the
              line.  The killed text is saved on the kill-ring.
       kill-whole-line
              Kill all characters on the current line, no  mat-
              ter where point is.
       kill-word (M-d)
              Kill  from  point the end of the current word, or
              if between words, to the end of  the  next  word.
              Word  boundaries  are  the  same as those used by
              forward-word.
       backward-kill-word (M-Rubout)
              Kill the word behind point.  Word boundaries  are
              the same as those used by backward-word.
       unix-word-rubout (C-w)
              Kill  the word behind point, using white space as
              a word boundary.  The killed text is saved on the
              kill-ring.
       unix-filename-rubout
              Kill the word behind point, using white space and
              the slash character as the word boundaries.   The
              killed text is saved on the kill-ring.
       delete-horizontal-space (M-\)
              Delete all spaces and tabs around point.
       kill-region
              Kill  the  text between the point and mark (saved
              cursor position).  This text is  referred  to  as
              the region.
       copy-region-as-kill
              Copy the text in the region to the kill buffer.
       copy-backward-word
              Copy  the  word  before point to the kill buffer.
              The  word  boundaries  are  the  same  as   back-
              ward-word.
       copy-forward-word
              Copy the word following point to the kill buffer.
              The word boundaries are the same as forward-word.
       yank (C-y)
              Yank  the top of the kill ring into the buffer at
              point.
       yank-pop (M-y)
              Rotate the kill ring, and yank the new top.  Only
              works following yank or yank-pop.

   Numeric Arguments
       digit-argument (M-0, M-1, ..., M--)
              Add this digit to the argument already accumulat-
              ing, or start  a  new  argument.   M--  starts  a
              negative argument.
       universal-argument
              This  is  another way to specify an argument.  If
              this command is followed by one or  more  digits,
              optionally  with a leading minus sign, those dig-
              its define the argument.  If the command is  fol-
              lowed  by  digits,  executing  universal-argument
              again ends the numeric argument, but is otherwise
              ignored.   As  a special case, if this command is
              immediately followed by a character that is  nei-
              ther  a  digit  or minus sign, the argument count
              for the next command is multiplied by four.   The
              argument  count  is  initially  one, so executing
              this function the first time makes  the  argument
              count  four,  a  second  time  makes the argument
              count sixteen, and so on.

   Completing
       complete (TAB)
              Attempt to perform completion on the text  before
              point.  The actual completion performed is appli-
              cation-specific.  Bash,  for  instance,  attempts
              completion  treating  the  text as a variable (if
              the text begins with $), username  (if  the  text
              begins with ~), hostname (if the text begins with
              @), or command (including aliases and  functions)
              in  turn.   If  none  of  these produces a match,
              filename completion is attempted.   Gdb,  on  the
              other  hand,  allows  completion of program func-
              tions and variables, and only  attempts  filename
              completion under certain circumstances.
       possible-completions (M-?)
              List  the possible completions of the text before
              point.
       insert-completions (M-*)
              Insert all completions of the text  before  point
              that  would  have been generated by possible-com-
              pletions.
       menu-complete
              Similar to complete, but replaces the word to  be
              completed  with  a  single match from the list of
              possible  completions.   Repeated  execution   of
              menu-complete  steps through the list of possible
              completions, inserting each match  in  turn.   At
              the  end  of the list of completions, the bell is
              rung (subject to the setting of  bell-style)  and
              the  original text is restored.  An argument of n
              moves n positions forward in the list of matches;
              a  negative argument may be used to move backward
              through the list.  This command is intended to be
              bound to TAB, but is unbound by default.
       delete-char-or-list
              Deletes  the character under the cursor if not at
              the beginning or end of the  line  (like  delete-
              char).   If at the end of the line, behaves iden-
              tically to possible-completions.

   Keyboard Macros
       start-kbd-macro (C-x ()
              Begin saving the characters typed into  the  cur-
              rent keyboard macro.
       end-kbd-macro (C-x ))
              Stop saving the characters typed into the current
              keyboard macro and store the definition.
       call-last-kbd-macro (C-x e)
              Re-execute the last keyboard  macro  defined,  by
              making  the  characters in the macro appear as if
              typed at the keyboard.

   Miscellaneous
       re-read-init-file (C-x C-r)
              Read in the contents of  the  inputrc  file,  and
              incorporate  any bindings or variable assignments
              found there.
       abort (C-g)
              Abort the current editing command  and  ring  the
              terminal's   bell  (subject  to  the  setting  of
              bell-style).
       do-uppercase-version (M-a, M-b, M-x, ...)
              If the metafied character x is lowercase, run the
              command that is bound to the corresponding upper-
              case character.
       prefix-meta (ESC)
              Metafy the next character typed.  ESC f is equiv-
              alent to Meta-f.
       undo (C-_, C-x C-u)
              Incremental  undo, separately remembered for each
              line.
       revert-line (M-r)
              Undo all changes made to this line.  This is like
              executing the undo command enough times to return
              the line to its initial state.
       tilde-expand (M-&)
              Perform tilde expansion on the current word.
       set-mark (C-@, M-<space>)
              Set the mark to the point.  If a numeric argument
              is supplied, the mark is set to that position.
       exchange-point-and-mark (C-x C-x)
              Swap the point with the mark.  The current cursor
              position is set to the saved  position,  and  the
              old cursor position is saved as the mark.
       character-search (C-])
              A  character  is  read  and point is moved to the
              next occurrence of that  character.   A  negative
              count searches for previous occurrences.
       character-search-backward (M-C-])
              A  character  is  read  and point is moved to the
              previous occurrence of that character.   A  nega-
              tive count searches for subsequent occurrences.
       insert-comment (M-#)
              Without  a  numeric  argument,  the  value of the
              readline comment-begin variable  is  inserted  at
              the  beginning of the current line.  If a numeric
              argument is supplied, this command acts as a tog-
              gle:   if  the characters at the beginning of the
              line do not match the value of comment-begin, the
              value  is  inserted,  otherwise the characters in
              comment-begin are deleted from the  beginning  of
              the  line.   In either case, the line is accepted
              as if a newline  had  been  typed.   The  default
              value  of  comment-begin makes the current line a
              shell comment.  If a numeric argument causes  the
              comment character to be removed, the line will be
              executed by the shell.
       dump-functions
              Print all of the functions and their key bindings
              to  the  readline  output  stream.   If a numeric
              argument is supplied, the output is formatted  in
              such a way that it can be made part of an inputrc
              file.
       dump-variables
              Print all of the  settable  variables  and  their
              values  to  the  readline  output  stream.   If a
              numeric argument is supplied, the output is  for-
              matted  in such a way that it can be made part of
              an inputrc file.
       dump-macros
              Print all of the readline key sequences bound  to
              macros and the strings they output.  If a numeric
              argument is supplied, the output is formatted  in
              such a way that it can be made part of an inputrc
              file.
       emacs-editing-mode (C-e)
              When in vi command mode, this causes a switch  to
              emacs editing mode.
       vi-editing-mode (M-C-j)
              When  in emacs editing mode, this causes a switch
              to vi editing mode.

DEFAULT KEY BINDINGS
       The following is a list of  the  default  emacs  and  vi
       bindings.   Characters with the eighth bit set are writ-
       ten as M-<character>, and are referred  to  as  metafied
       characters.   The  printable  ASCII  characters not men-
       tioned in the list of emacs standard bindings are  bound
       to  the  self-insert  function,  which  just inserts the
       given character into the input line.   In  vi  insertion
       mode,  all  characters  not  specifically  mentioned are
       bound to self-insert.   Characters  assigned  to  signal
       generation by stty(1) or the terminal driver, such as C-
       Z or C-C, retain that function.  Upper  and  lower  case
       metafied  characters  are  bound to the same function in
       the emacs mode meta keymap.   The  remaining  characters
       are  unbound,  which  causes  readline  to ring the bell
       (subject to the setting of the bell-style variable).

   Emacs Mode
             Emacs Standard bindings

             "C-@"  set-mark
             "C-A"  beginning-of-line
             "C-B"  backward-char
             "C-D"  delete-char
             "C-E"  end-of-line
             "C-F"  forward-char
             "C-G"  abort
             "C-H"  backward-delete-char
             "C-I"  complete
             "C-J"  accept-line
             "C-K"  kill-line
             "C-L"  clear-screen
             "C-M"  accept-line
             "C-N"  next-history
             "C-P"  previous-history
             "C-Q"  quoted-insert
             "C-R"  reverse-search-history
             "C-S"  forward-search-history
             "C-T"  transpose-chars
             "C-U"  unix-line-discard
             "C-V"  quoted-insert
             "C-W"  unix-word-rubout
             "C-Y"  yank
             "C-]"  character-search
             "C-_"  undo
             " " to "/"  self-insert
             "0"  to "9"  self-insert
             ":"  to "~"  self-insert
             "C-?"  backward-delete-char

             Emacs Meta bindings

             "M-C-G"  abort
             "M-C-H"  backward-kill-word
             "M-C-I"  tab-insert
             "M-C-J"  vi-editing-mode
             "M-C-M"  vi-editing-mode
             "M-C-R"  revert-line
             "M-C-Y"  yank-nth-arg
             "M-C-["  complete
             "M-C-]"  character-search-backward
             "M-space"  set-mark
             "M-#"  insert-comment
             "M-&"  tilde-expand
             "M-*"  insert-completions
             "M--"  digit-argument
             "M-."  yank-last-arg
             "M-0"  digit-argument
             "M-1"  digit-argument
             "M-2"  digit-argument
             "M-3"  digit-argument
             "M-4"  digit-argument
             "M-5"  digit-argument
             "M-6"  digit-argument
             "M-7"  digit-argument
             "M-8"  digit-argument
             "M-9"  digit-argument
             "M-<"  beginning-of-history
             "M-="  possible-completions
             "M->"  end-of-history
             "M-?"  possible-completions
             "M-B"  backward-word
             "M-C"  capitalize-word
             "M-D"  kill-word
             "M-F"  forward-word
             "M-L"  downcase-word
             "M-N"  non-incremental-forward-search-history
             "M-P"  non-incremental-reverse-search-history
             "M-R"  revert-line
             "M-T"  transpose-words
             "M-U"  upcase-word
             "M-Y"  yank-pop
             "M-\"  delete-horizontal-space
             "M-~"  tilde-expand
             "M-C-?"  backward-kill-word
             "M-_"  yank-last-arg

             Emacs Control-X bindings

             "C-XC-G"  abort
             "C-XC-R"  re-read-init-file
             "C-XC-U"  undo
             "C-XC-X"  exchange-point-and-mark
             "C-X("  start-kbd-macro
             "C-X)"  end-kbd-macro
             "C-XE"  call-last-kbd-macro
             "C-XC-?"  backward-kill-line


   VI Mode bindings
             VI Insert Mode functions

             "C-D"  vi-eof-maybe
             "C-H"  backward-delete-char
             "C-I"  complete
             "C-J"  accept-line
             "C-M"  accept-line
             "C-R"  reverse-search-history
             "C-S"  forward-search-history
             "C-T"  transpose-chars
             "C-U"  unix-line-discard
             "C-V"  quoted-insert
             "C-W"  unix-word-rubout
             "C-Y"  yank
             "C-["  vi-movement-mode
             "C-_"  undo
             " " to "~"  self-insert
             "C-?"  backward-delete-char

             VI Command Mode functions

             "C-D"  vi-eof-maybe
             "C-E"  emacs-editing-mode
             "C-G"  abort
             "C-H"  backward-char
             "C-J"  accept-line
             "C-K"  kill-line
             "C-L"  clear-screen
             "C-M"  accept-line
             "C-N"  next-history
             "C-P"  previous-history
             "C-Q"  quoted-insert
             "C-R"  reverse-search-history
             "C-S"  forward-search-history
             "C-T"  transpose-chars
             "C-U"  unix-line-discard
             "C-V"  quoted-insert
             "C-W"  unix-word-rubout
             "C-Y"  yank
             "C-_"  vi-undo
             " "  forward-char
             "#"  insert-comment
             "$"  end-of-line
             "%"  vi-match
             "&"  vi-tilde-expand
             "*"  vi-complete
             "+"  next-history
             ","  vi-char-search
             "-"  previous-history
             "."  vi-redo
             "/"  vi-search
             "0"  beginning-of-line
             "1" to "9"  vi-arg-digit
             ";"  vi-char-search
             "="  vi-complete
             "?"  vi-search
             "A"  vi-append-eol
             "B"  vi-prev-word
             "C"  vi-change-to
             "D"  vi-delete-to
             "E"  vi-end-word
             "F"  vi-char-search
             "G"  vi-fetch-history
             "I"  vi-insert-beg
             "N"  vi-search-again
             "P"  vi-put
             "R"  vi-replace
             "S"  vi-subst
             "T"  vi-char-search
             "U"  revert-line
             "W"  vi-next-word
             "X"  backward-delete-char
             "Y"  vi-yank-to
             "\"  vi-complete
             "^"  vi-first-print
             "_"  vi-yank-arg
             "`"  vi-goto-mark
             "a"  vi-append-mode
             "b"  vi-prev-word
             "c"  vi-change-to
             "d"  vi-delete-to
             "e"  vi-end-word
             "f"  vi-char-search
             "h"  backward-char
             "i"  vi-insertion-mode
             "j"  next-history
             "k"  prev-history
             "l"  forward-char
             "m"  vi-set-mark
             "n"  vi-search-again
             "p"  vi-put
             "r"  vi-change-char
             "s"  vi-subst
             "t"  vi-char-search
             "u"  vi-undo
             "w"  vi-next-word
             "x"  vi-delete
             "y"  vi-yank-to
             "|"  vi-column
             "~"  vi-change-case

SEE ALSO
       The Gnu Readline Library, Brian Fox and Chet Ramey
       The Gnu History Library, Brian Fox and Chet Ramey
       bash(1)

FILES
       ~/.inputrc
              Individual readline initialization file

AUTHORS
       Brian Fox, Free Software Foundation
       bfox@gnu.org

       Chet Ramey, Case Western Reserve University
       chet@ins.CWRU.Edu

BUG REPORTS
       If you find a bug in readline,  you  should  report  it.
       But first, you should make sure that it really is a bug,
       and that it appears in the latest version of  the  read-
       line library that you have.

       Once  you  have  determined  that a bug actually exists,
       mail a bug report to bug-readline@gnu.org.  If you  have
       a  fix,  you  are welcome to mail that as well!  Sugges-
       tions and `philosophical' bug reports may be  mailed  to
       bug-readline@gnu.org  or  posted to the Usenet newsgroup
       gnu.bash.bug.

       Comments and bug reports  concerning  this  manual  page
       should be directed to chet@ins.CWRU.Edu.

BUGS
       It's too big and too slow.



GNU Readline 5.0        2004 January 28             READLINE(3)
